Testing on Monday, August 6th.
Monday, August 6th.
Testing, testing.
Testing, two.
Testing, testing, one, two, three.
This is August 6th, we're in the Evans Library and we're chatting today with Colonel Jim Woodall about his experiences here at A&M as the Commandant.
You graduated from A&M now in what year?
1950.
1950, just in time to go to Korea, I guess.
Well, just in time to go in the service for the war started about the 25th of June.
However, I didn't go to Korea, I went to Germany.
Oh, you went to Germany.
Pretty quickly?
Actually, I was called to active duty in September of 1950, and then
2nd Armored Division at Fort Hood, Texas, and we trained recruits up to, you know, to combat ready status, and then the entire 2nd Armored Division deployed to Germany as part of the NATO buildup in 1951.
All right, briefly summarize your active duty experience.
Take us from 1950.
Well, I started out as, of course, a 2nd Lieutenant platoon leader in the 41st Armored Infantry Battalion.
and I stayed with them a while and then there was a critical shortage of artillery lieutenants and so I was sent to the field artillery to help train the field artillery units and then that was in late 50 and early 51.
In April of 51 I was sent back to the 41st infantry battalion and then in July we deployed to Germany and stayed in Germany three years at Coleman Barracks
which is near Mannheim and Heidelberg.
I rotated back in 1954, and I was a company commander in the 512th Armored Infantry Battalion at Fort Hood.
And then in 1955, I resigned my commission and went into the lumber business in Belton, Texas.
Actually, I was working for my father-in-law in the lumber business and in the building products.
We had a little manufacturing company building products and stayed there.
And then I realized I'd made a mistake by getting out of the Army, but at that time, you couldn't get back in once you got out.
So in 1959 a program where former regular officers could reapply for active duty came along and I reapplied and I was accepted and rejoined the Army and was called back to active duty in January 1960 in the second infantry division at Fort Benning, Georgia where I was the executive officer of a
company in the 9th Infantry Regiment, 2nd Infantry Division, and we were training recruits at that time.
And during that period, later on at Fort Benning, I became the commandant of the 2nd Infantry Division NCO Academy.
And then I went to school there at Fort Benning.
It was the career officer's course, and it was a nine-month school.
At the end of the school in July of 1963,
Then I went to Korea and I was stationed on the DMZ in Korea up near Panmunjom.
I was the battalion adjutant S-1 for the 8th Calvary Regiment.
And we were, like I said, we were stationed right on the DMZ and had a lot of things going on, a lot of action.
In fact, that was my first time I was ever shot at was along the DMZ on an ambush that we pulled.
I rotated back to the States in 1963 and I was assigned again to the 2nd Armored Division at Fort Hood and I was a Brigade S-1 and later on I was Division G-1.
And during that time I went on Operation Big Lift to Germany where the entire division went to Germany for
six weeks to two months.
And another trip that we made while we were there was Operation Longhorn.
No, it was Operation Desert Strike out in the Mojave Desert and spent a couple of months out in the Mojave Desert.
Then I was selected for the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth and I went to school up there for almost a year.
From there I went to Washington, D.C.
where I was in the strategy and tactics analysis group.
And I was a military analyst at that time, stayed there two years, and then I couldn't wait to get out of Washington.
In fact, I volunteered to go to Vietnam.
And after two years in Washington, they did send me to Vietnam.
And in Vietnam, I was assigned to the 173rd Airborne Brigade and to the 1st Battalion of the 50th Infantry, Mechanized Infantry.
as the battalion executive officer.
I was executive officer for five months and then for six months I was battalion commander and then my last month in Vietnam there were some problems in an airborne unit and so my command time was up.
I had my six months in so they sent me over to command the airborne battalion for a short while until another lieutenant colonel came in to command the battalion and so I stayed over there a month or so and
Then I came back to the States and again I was assigned to Fort Hood, Texas and I was in the combat service support test headquarters and we were testing computerizing personnel and logistics in the division.
I stayed there a couple of years and then I was selected for the Army War College
in 1971, graduated from the War College, and this War College was at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania, and I graduated from the War College in 1972, and I was sent to Germany, to Heidelberg, Germany, to headquarters U.S.
Army Europe.
And there I was the infantry systems officer, and later on became the chief of the weapons branch in
in the operations part of USRA headquarters.
My last two years, I was three years in DESOPs there in Heidelberg, and then my last two years I was the deputy commander of the U.S.
Army Postal Group Europe.
I didn't have much to do with the postal operations.
main function was to act as the IG and to get the troops shaped up because they were a pretty sorry outfit when I went in to get the troops looking and acting like soldiers.
So I spent two years traveling all over Germany.
We had 18 different units and scattered all over Germany and I spent two years visiting those units and getting them generally shaped up.
I returned and
July of 1977, came to Texas A&M, and that's where I was appointed as the commandant.
And I stayed at Texas A&M as a commandant of cadets and the professor of military science until my retirement from military service in August of 1982.
How did you and the commandant get, how did those two
How did that role mesh for you?
Did somebody communicate with you?
Did you contact?
Did you seek it or did they seek you?
Oh, well, I sought the job, certainly.
I wrote to Tiger Teague, who was the representative.
I wrote to Jack Williams.
I wrote to Clyde Wells, who was the chairman of the board, who was a family friend, telling them I wanted the job.
But Colonel Parsons, my predecessor, kept extending.
So he would extend here at A&M and I would extend over to Germany.
And I ended up spending five years in Germany on a three-year tour.
And I was finally notified to come back here for an interview because the person that the Pentagon sent down for that job, they had been turned down here by
by the authorities at A&M, and so I came from Germany over and interviewed for the job and got it.
Who, do you remember, can you describe the interview process?
How many sessions were there and with whom?
Well, they essentially knew who I was.
I'd sent them, you know, my military record and a picture and so forth.
Excuse me.
And first I went to Colonel Parson, who was the commandant, and he told me, you're not going to have any trouble.
And so then we went over to see General Simpson, and he was the one that the commandant reported directly to, and he was an assistant or, yeah, I think assistant or some kind of assistant vice president for student services.
And then, of course, he reported to John Colas, who was the vice president of student service, and I went in to see him.
And then I went to see, by this time, Dr. Williams was sick, and I went to see John Calhoun and visited with him for a little while, and then I went back over to the Trigon, and by the time I got back to Trigon, Colonel Parsons said, well, there's no problem, so you've got the job, and so I was real happy.
Of course, my daughter was here from Germany, going to school, she was a freshman,
So I had a chance to visit with her, but I was very glad, you know, that I'd been accepted.
And so then I went back to Germany.
In each of these sessions with these various individuals, which one do you remember that was really the most, like a job interview, the most?
There were no job interviews.
We just sat down and shot the bull, and they wanted to know who I was and what I had done.
As far as you knew, were you one of many, or were you... There was one sent down from the Pentagon, and he was turned down.
Okay.
And then I was next on the list.
All right.
Of the people, and I'm not going to ask the negative, of the people who interviewed you, which one created the strongest personal impression on you, the most positive?
Oh, I think General Simpsons.
by far.
I mean, you know, he was such a dynamic, and they were all great, you know, John Colas and Dr. Calhoun and Tom Parson, but... Had you met General Simpson before?
I had never, I never even heard of General Simpson, but he was... Describe him as you... Well, he was like a great gentleman, grand gentleman, and a prince of a man.
They were just
Everything about him you had to like.
Perfectly erect.
That's right.
In every way.
He was a straight shooter.
He told you how it was.
Did anybody describe for you any problems that you would need to deal with?
Well, both, oh yes.
Parsons and General Simpson.
What were those problems?
Well, I'm not sure I remember what kind of problems they decided.
But they, you know, they said, you know, you've got problems with, of course, one of the main problems was having women in the Corps.
That was one of the major problems.
And, you know,
conduct of cadets, you know, some of the stupid tricks they pulled.
But there was nothing major, but the major problem would have been women in the Corps.
At the time you visited the campus, were there already women?
They were introduced by the previous commandant, introduced into the Corps.
During Colonel Parsons' time?
About 75, I think, or something, might have been 74, I'm not sure.
Did you, what was your impression, when you first chatted with him, what was your impression of Dr. Williams?
Well, I didn't see Dr. Williams for some time after that.
Oh, okay.
You know, I saw him.
Like I said, he had been sick and he came out.
But I thought he was a tremendous individual, you know, dynamic.
I enjoyed, you know, I enjoyed every time I ever had a chance to talk to him.
Did he ever say anything to you about his World War II record?
Never did.
Which was a proud, proud, proud record.
He was always very, very, very...
shy and private about that.
See, many landings in the Pacific, wounded, decorated, but he never... I never heard anything about that.
He never talked about it.
All right, so you came and began your services commandant at what year, what date?
Well, I interviewed in April of 1977, and then I came
here and I left Germany about the 8th of July and I hit the ground here on the 15th of July, which was my birthday, and started to work.
Okay.
Now, was Jarvis Miller over?
Jarvis Miller was president by then?
Was not the president at the time.
Oh.
He was the director of the Ag Experiment Station.
Ag Experiment Station.
I knew he was, he was here, but
In fact, I went to see him a few days before he was selected as the president.
And it turned out he was selected as the president.
Of course, we had been freshmen in the same outfit.
Oh, that's right.
That's right.
Yeah, you knew him well.
When described moving you and your, were there any children at home then or it was just you and your wife?
Well, I had one married daughter.
I had one daughter who was going to school.
here at Texas A&M.
My oldest daughter had graduated from Southwest Texas and had come to Germany to stay with us for six months.
She graduated in December, stayed with us six months until we came back.
And as it turned out, I extended two more years and she just stayed with us.
So she came from Germany with us.
So I had my oldest daughter and my youngest daughter who was in junior high at that time or getting ready to go into junior high.
So I had two with me.
I had one married and then I had one here at Texas A&M.
Describe what it was for you and your wife and those daughters to find a place to live here.
Well, of course, we came and my wife's home was in Belton, so she went to Belton and I came down here and she came down and we looked at a few places and got a real estate agent to show us around, but there really weren't that many places.
I was talking to Dr. Williams and told him, you know, I was staying in the motel and my wife was in Belton and she was running back and forth looking for a house.
And so he volunteered to let me stay in an apartment, the president's apartment, which is over in the MSC.
And we stayed over there a couple of weeks.
And then I had my brother-in-law had a nice travel trailer.
And so he brought it down for me and we put it in a little trailer park here.
And so we stayed in the travel trailer.
for probably a month to six weeks, I'm not sure how long it was, while we located a house.
And it turned out the house we bought was one of the vice presidents here, Howard Vestal.
We bought his house, I think it was the day that it came on the market.
We went by and we made a deal on it then.
And so I had already told my wife that we can't buy a new house.
I have to have a house that's
Yard is established, it's got shrubbery.
I don't have any time to do anything except maybe mow the lawn.
So we were looking for an older house or an established house.
He was a P-38 pilot during the war.
I didn't know that.
I knew it was in the Air Force.
He was in the first squadron that flew from Britain to North Africa in the fall of 42.
I heard him tell they were given, literally given National Geographic
maps of the Iberian Peninsula and told, do not, do not, do not violate the Spanish airspace.
We don't want Franco to get in the war.
And so they would fly around, and when they landed in North Africa, I believe he said they had 30 minutes or 15 minutes of fuel left.
And that was all.
And I've heard his wife tease him when he first got
his wings and all that, how much he loved to have his white silk scarf around his neck.
And one night on one of their dates that he got the scarf hung in the door when he closed the door.
So you get settled in in the summer of 77.
Describe the staff you inherited in the Trigon.
Who were the key people on the commandant staff when you arrived?
Well, the staff was very austere.
We had Colonel Johnson, who was a retired lieutenant colonel.
What was his first name?
Don Johnson.
Don?
Don Johnson was the assistant commandant.
And then we had
part-time grad assistant and I'm not sure if that was Jake Betty.
Jake Betty was there at one time.
I'm not sure who it was, but and that was plus I had we had a receptionist and about we had about three or four typists and clerks and so forth.
I think we had four in the office and
And that was the Commandant's staff.
And all of that was in the Trigon?
Yes, it was all in that one office.
Does that building have an official name other than Trigon?
I think it's called the Trigon.
I don't know that it has an official name.
Was it yet air conditioned?
It was air conditioned at that time.
And so describe your first few weeks that summer.
Well, of course, immediately,
When I came, like I said, I came from Germany and started work, and they were having new student conferences.
Well, I let Don Johnson take those for a while until I could find out what was going on, because it was where you would speak to all the incoming students, and then you'd speak to the parents, and there were about three different speeches that you would do in one new student conference.
Sometimes there were two student conferences a week.
So I let him do it a while, then I finally took over that
that job and so that really kept me busy and you know, especially during August since it's 100 degrees and you're in your uniform trying to dash around the campus.
And, of course, we were heavily recruiting, trying to, you know, trying to get as many freshmen as we could.
And then we, of course, we started in late August at the FOW, and that was really the first look I'd gotten at the Corps.
Of course, and then we had, we brought the commanders in, had a commander's conference, and that was the first look I got at the commanders, first chance I had to talk to them.
Then immediately brought in the freshmen, and then school started, and we never, you know, we never slowed down until the end of school.
And then you started the new student conferences again.
So there really wasn't any slack time over there.
You were fully committed 12 months a year.
And all of the student corps leaders had been selected in the spring, had they not?
Right, yeah.
So you inherited?
I inherited a new slate of commanders.
And who was the key secretary for the Commandant?
Well, it was Ann Harton at that time.
H-A-R-T?
H-O-R-T-O-N.
H-O-R-T.
I think that was who it was.
And then we had this receptionist that had been there for years and years was Butch Toole.
And I don't even know what Butch's first name is, but she always went by Butch.
And I should explain that the Army sent me here as a professor of military science to run the Army ROTC program.
But there was an agreement back in the 50s.
At one time when we had General Malloy, or at that time Colonel Malloy and Colonel Boatner, they were the PMS and T's, they called them then, Professor of Military Science and Tactics.
And they were the commandant.
Well, then the, and that's, you only had Army ROTC at that time.
and then had the Air Force ROTC, but they continued with the Army colonel in charge as a commandant.
And then when the Korean War broke out, I don't know what happened, but Colonel Joe Davis, who was a university employee, who was the deputy commandant under Malloy and Boatner, he became the commandant.
And he was the commandant for 10 or 11 years.
And that would take you up to the early 60s, and then there was an agreement between the U.S.
Army and Texas A&M that the senior Army officer would also serve as Commandant of Cadets.
And so that's how the Army became the Commandant, the professor of military science.
And of course, I think it was always resented by the Navy and by the Air Force that the Army officer was
and it did cause some problems at times.
Were most of the other officers on the Commandant staff, were most of them Army?
Well, there was only one.
That was Don Johnson, and he was Army.
And he was Army, okay.
Now, and had we yet done the, with Mr. Teague's assistant, had we gotten the Navy unit, meaning with the Marine Corps emphasis, had that yet?
It was done under Colonel Parson, my predecessor.
Okay.
And so when you got here, some of those Corps members were?
Yeah, we had Air Force and Navy with heavy Marine Corps.
About, as well as you can remember, about how many members were in the Corps your first fall?
Probably about 2,200.
I know somewhere around there, I know that the most we had in the Corps during my five years was 19, I guess, 75, 76.
And we had, we started out with 2,475.
But normally we had 22, 2300.
And as you began to
evaluate the Corps when you got here.
Compare it to the Corps you remembered that you left as a student.
How had the Corps changed?
Well, it was funny, but the Corps really hadn't changed that much over the years.
It was still essentially the same type of organization.
Now, of course, there were outward obvious changes.
They had much better uniforms than we had.
And I can't say the dorms were any better because they're the same old dorms that we lived in when I was a cadet.
But primarily the uniforms and of course you had, you didn't have Saturday classes which was certainly a benefit to the Corps.
And a quality of students.
Well, I'm sure that when I came here, all you had to have was, you know, a little bit of money and a high school diploma and have some way to get here.
Like I said before, you know, high school diploma, 200 bucks and ability to hitchhike, and you're an Aggie.
But, of course, the entrance requirements were higher.
I mean, they had the entrance requirements now.
And so they were higher, and I'm sure academically they were better students.
And numerically, about what was the comparison?
How many were in the Corps?
Well, somewhere between 22 and 2400.
When I was in the Corps, it was about half the student body, or a little less than half, and the student body was around 9,000.
So there'd be 4,000 to 4,500 in the Corps.
So, four occupied, when you became Commandant, about what percentage of the core dorm area?
Well, of the 12 dorms, they occupied, I think, 10.
And that was my goal.
I had several goals.
One was to, you know, get 2,500 cadets, and another one was to have all 12 dormitories.
Well, I got 2,475.
And I did at one time have all 12 dormitories.
However, there was one dormitory where we had the females that had two floors of cadets and two floors of civilian students.
And what were your other goals when you took over as coming up?
Well, the 2,500, the 12 dormitories, and improve the discipline of the Corps.
Did anybody give you any advice, any directions, any counsel as you're beginning?
Well, I talked daily, and I visited daily with General Simpson.
He was the key person you talked about?
He was the key person and my inspiration, my mentor, I guess.
And we discussed many things, you know, about the Corps.
However, he never came out and told me
what to do or that I had to do something.
I would usually, if I was going to do something, I would go and discuss it with him to tell him what I was going to do.
And he was very supportive in everything.
Now his office was where?
It was in the YMCA.
In the YMCA.
Yeah, along with John Colas.
Right near John Colas.
Was he in civilian attire each day or a suit?
The only time he ever appeared in uniform was that on a few occasions.
One is that he was normally the commissioning officer during the summer and he would appear in his uniform at that time.
And there may have been another time that he appeared in uniform but I think for the Marine Corps ball or Marine Corps birthday party he would be in his uniform but not over two or three times a year.
Did I mention to you the story he told me about when he became division commander in the Marine Corps?
No.
This is for the typist to put this as an editorial note.
General Simpson told me that when he became, I believe it was the 1st Marine Division, and he learned to his shock that somebody had removed all of the battle streamers
from the division's official flags.
Colors.
And he wanted to have those put back in some appropriate manner.
And he found that those streamers went back all the way to the Spanish-American War.
Now this was, they were stationed at, what's the Marine base near San Diego?
Kent Pendleton, is that right?
Yeah, Kent Pendleton.
And he learned that there were retirees living in the area from every campaign.
And so he had the whole division present.
And he had a veteran come up who had served in that campaign to put that back over.
He said, I realized after that day I never had to worry about pride and spirit anymore.
But that was a truly, truly touching experience.
He said, not only for the young men in the outfit, but certainly for the new division commander.
And I've always thought, too, that seems to me like prototypical Simpson.
He was that kind of a man.
Did any other, did president, vice president, board members, former students, anybody else give you advice?
Oh, I got advice from former students, yeah.
Share some of it.
What was it like?
Plus or minus?
One guy, I had had a little confrontation with the core staff, and we can go into that a little later.
Oh, yes, we'd like that.
At the beginning of school.
It wasn't really a confrontation, but it was, you know, an understanding.
And so one of my classmates came up to me
at one of the first football games and said, well, I understand that you're just about to destroy the Corps.
And I just looked at him and I said, well, I'm not sure that you really know what you're talking about.
And that was the end of that conversation.
And then, of course, they had the famous saber incident, and I had all kind of letters that when I took the sabers away from the ODs, which is another story,
that I was accused of destroying traditions at A&M and old armies going to hell.
And so, you know, I just had to ignore most of that.
I'd get those letters.
A lot of them I wouldn't even answer.
They were so stupid, you know, wouldn't honor them with an answer.
But I got plenty of advice, primary and former students.
John Colas really...
You know, he let General Simpson handle the Corps.
And as far as Board of Regents, all I got was support from them.
So nobody gave you marching orders when you get in
do this this this no i really didn't this kind of did it uh you know all right as as the routine started then that fall uh describe a typical week for uh for the